[HSEARCH] 7.1.0.Alpha1 (#190)
hibernate/hibernate.org: search/releases/7.1/index.adoc

:awestruct-layout: project-releases-series
:awestruct-project: search
:awestruct-series_version: "7.1"
:page-interpolate: true
:latest-release-version: #{series(page, page.series_version).releases.first.version}
:hsearch-doc-url-prefix: #{reference_doc(site.projects[page.project], series(page, page.series_version)).html_url}

[[vector-search]]
=== Vector search for the Lucene Backend

> Hibernate Search supports vector search in the Lucene backend as an incubating feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hibernate Search now allows vector search in the Lucene backend as an incubating feature.
```

> Vector search provides the tools to build a semantic search for binary (images, audio or video) or text data.
> Note that there are no built-in models or high-level abstractions to convert binary/text data into vectors.

Reviewer: Maybe clarify the expected process, like this?

```suggestion

Vector search provides the tools to build a semantic search for binary (images, audio or video) or text data:
external tools convert that data to vectors (arrays of bytes or floats, also called "embeddings"),
which are then used for indexing and queries in Hibernate Search.

```

Hibernate Search introduces a new field type -- `@VectorField` and a new predicate `knn`, so that the vectors can be indexed
and then searched upon.

Vector fields can work with vector data represented as `byte` or `float` arrays in the documents.
Out of the box `byte[]` and `float[]` property types will work with the new field type. For any other entity property types,

> a custom binder should be implemented. Keep in mind that indexed vectors *must* be of the same length

Reviewer: It works with bridges too, right?

```suggestion
a custom link:{hsearch-doc-url-prefix}#binding-valuebridge[value bridge]
or link:{hsearch-doc-url-prefix}#binding-valuebridge-valuebinder[value binder] should be implemented.
Keep in mind that indexed vectors *must* be of the same length
```

and that this length should be specified upfront for the schema to be created:

[source, Java, indent=0, subs="+attributes"]
----
@Entity
@Indexed
public class Book {

	@Id
	private Integer id;

> 	@VectorField(dimension = 512)

Reviewer: I'd feel safer if you found an external source telling us that 512 dimensions make sense for image vectors :]

Author: seems safe enough 🙈: https://www.elastic.co/blog/implement-image-similarity-search-elastic will lead to:
```json
{
  "settings": {
    "index.refresh_interval": "5s",
    "number_of_shards": 1
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "image_embedding": {
        "type": "dense_vector",
        "dims": 512,
        "index": true,
        "similarity": "cosine"
      },
      "image_id": {
        "type": "keyword"
      },
      "image_name": {
        "type" : "keyword"
      },
      "relative_path" : {
        "type" : "keyword"
      },
      "exif" : {
        "properties" : {
          "location": {
            "type": "geo_point"
          },
          "date": {
            "type": "date"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Reviewer: Ok, thanks.

FYI @gsmet it seems I was wrong when I told you arrays used for vector search would necessarily use a low number of dimensions. Here it seems 512 dimensions (`array.length == 512`) is reasonable.
I did read somewhere that 3-4 dimensions were the norm, but I guess I shouldn't have trusted a single source.

	private float[] coverImageEmbeddings;

	// Other properties ...
}
----

Searching for vector similarities is performed via a `knn` predicate:

[source, Java, indent=0, subs="+attributes"]
----
float[] coverImageEmbeddingsVector = /*...*/

List<Book> hits = searchSession.search( Book.class )
.where( f ->
    // provide the number of similar documents to look for:
    f.knn( 5 )
        // the name of the vector field:
        .field( "coverImageEmbeddings" )

>         // the vector, similar to which we are looking for

Reviewer: I find this hard to express clearly... maybe:

```suggestion
        // matched documents will be the ones whose indexed vector
        // is "most similar" to this vector
```
